Hi, my name is Brian Caffo, and this
is the second lecture of the executive
data science specialization course
on data analysis in real life.
So in this lecture,
I'd like to talk about machine learning
versus traditional statistics,
just to orient you to the way I think
about the difference between the two.
And why most of what I'm going to
talk about in the subsequent lectures
really applies to more
traditional statistics.
But it also somewhat applies to machine
learning, and in this lecture I'll tell
you the difference, or
at least how I perceive the difference.
In this lecture,
we'd like to contrast machine learning
versus more traditional statistics.
Because some of what we're gonna cover
in subsequent lectures is universally
applicable to both.
However, some of it is
really more oriented toward
traditional statistical analysis.
And in this lecture, I'm going to
tell you kind of what I perceive
to be the difference between the two.
So it's very kind of oriented
toward my impressions.
So here's my sort of boiler plate
bifurcation of these
two style of analysis.
So to me, machine learning really
emphasizes things like predictions.
And so, it tends to evaluate performance
via prediction performance, and
we'll go through some examples later on.
So there's a lot of concern in
machine learning for overfitting,
that's fitting way too complex of a model,
but not model complexity per se.
If you do good prediction and
you're not overfitting,
then it's okay to have a rather
complex model in machine learning.
So the emphasis is on performance and
automated learning.
And generalizability is usually
obtained through performance of
the algorithm on novel datasets.
So machine learning tends to be
a very data oriented disappoint.
So if you want to discuss that
your machine learning algorithm
is generalizable, usually there's a sort
of show me attitude in machine learning.
Get a new dataset and apply it to that.
And there's usually no
superpopulation model specified.
So there's no, my data is a sample
from a larger population,
and I'm thinking of it this way
through statistical assumptions.
And there is a lot of concern
over performance and robustness.
So let's contrast this with
traditional statistical analysis.
So traditional statistical analysis
focuses on so-called superpopulation
inference.
We have a dataset.
We're gonna assume that that data set is
a sample from a larger population that we
are interested in.
And it tends to focus
on A-Priori Hypotheses.
Your hypotheses are specified A-Priori.
And in general,
there's this principal of parsimony
in traditional statistical analysis.
And that's basically saying,
all us being equal the simpler models
gonna be preferred over
a more complex model.
And I would go even further, that most
traditional statisticians would say
even if you take a ding on
prediction performance,
even if your model isn't performing that
well, you'd rather have a simpler model
than a complex model unless
the difference in performance is extreme.
In traditional statistical analysis,
you emphasize parameter
interpretability a lot.
In contrast to machine learning
where you may have lots and
lots of parameters in your model,
your algorithm that you don't really
care about those individual parameters.
But in a regression analysis, for example,
you care about every one of the slopes.
So the other super population inference,
so typically
we have a statistical model that connects
our data to this super population.
That's the crux of statistical modeling.
So some sorta statistical model, or
even in non-parametric settings or
robust settings,
we often have sampling assumptions.
That connect our data to the population.
And so, just like machine learning,
there's concern over robustness.
But there's also this large concern over
the status statistical assumptions that
connect our data to the population.
So let's go through some examples.
And I picked mostly prediction
examples that I'm gonna talk,
if I were to have approached this problem
as a traditional statistical analysis,
what I would have done.
So one of the most famous prediction
problems, in recent years,
was the Netflix Prize.
And in the Netflix Prize, the teams
competed to produce the best recommender
system for the company, Netflix.
So they wanted to recommend, to users,
new movies that they might like.
Through their star ratings system.
The Netflix Prize was interesting,
because it was a $1 million prize.
And some good friends of
the team here actually won.
A close friend, Chris Valencia,
a great data scientist who works at AT&T.
So the goal of this prize, and
his team won, the goal of this prize was
to build a machine learning algorithm
that produced these recommendations.
So that you wanted it to be automated.
You wanted it to be something that
could be adaptive that maybe could
relearn the algorithm as needed, and
you would define success as anything
that produced reliable recommendations.
And you can check that by when people
watch a movie, and
actually then subsequently rate it.
If they rate it high,
then it was a good recommendation,
if they rate it low then it
was a poor recommendation.
So that's the goal of
the machine learning analysis.
But what if you were to
approach this same problem
with a traditional statistical analysis?
Well rather than building an algorithm,
what you would wanna do is
build a parsimonious and
interpretable model to better understand
why people choose the movies that they do.
So you'd be much more interested in
where the sample of people that you
are interested in,
were they representative of
the totality of Netflix users.
Or if you wanted to generalize,
not just the Netflix users in general, but
to movie watchers in general, you'd wanna
know to what extent are my Netflix users
in my sample representative of the larger
population of movie watchers in general.
So in this case, you would be
building probably smaller models,
you'd be trying to get very interpretable
results, interpretable parameters.
And you would define
success as anything true
that was learned about movies choices.
So if you learned that certain
demographics like certain kinds of movies,
or you learn that people who,
psychological reasons why people like
certain movies, or anything that was true.
And parsimonious learned about movie
choices would be the hopeful result,
the hopeful success of such
a statistical analysis,
even if you didn't gain
any better prediction.
You can learn something true, but that
may not really help you with prediction.
Another example that I was involved
in was the Heritage Health Prize.
So this was actually a slightly bigger,
in terms of the monetary
payout, prediction competition.
In this case,
the goal was to take previous years',
previous couple of years',
insurance claims.
And try and predict how long
a person would spend in the hospital
in subsequent years.
So for example, just because we spent
a lot of time on this prediction,
an example,
one that we found was if a woman was
in the hospital, for
a hospital stay for a baby, then
two years later they had a higher, they
were more likely to be in the hospital
again just because a lot of people tend
to have babies about two years apart.
So that was an example of a predictor so
for among women With having had
a hospital stay for having a child two
years pervious, they had a slightly
increased prediction of being in
the hospital two years subsequently.
And then there were some
other obvious ones.
For example, people who are in for
cardiac problems and things like that,
tended to have an elevated risk of
being in the hospital the next year.
So at any rate,
the machine learning algorithm for
this problem,
which we spent a lot of time building,
was basically to build an automated
system for predicting hospital stays.
So you'd want, if you were a hospital
provider or something like this,
you would want to know from the collection
of previous claims that you have
what exactly, how long people would
spend in a hospital in subsequent years.
And you could evaluate that,
again, like most things,
you would want the system to be able to
relearn itself over time as things change.
And you'd want it to be robust and, but
success would be anything that
produces reliable predictions.
And anything that produces
more reliable predictions
is better than something that
produces less reliable predictions.
And you could come up with a pretty
simple formula to define what you meant
by good predictions.
By the way, in this case,
I think we got 12.
We were listed as 14th, but
2 other teams got disqualified, so
we came up with 12th, and
it was a 3-year prediction competition.
Or two-year prediction competition.
And by the end things got pretty grim.
We have to come up with
a prediction every single day.
And boy, were we tired of building
prediction algorithms by the end.
So I would just give you as a caveat,
if you ever intend to enter into
one of these competitions, think
a year later down the road if you wanna
be building predictions every single day.
So let's now contrast what
I would have done if,
instead of engaging in this prediction
competition, if I had been interested in
the science of insurance claims and
hospital stays.
Well, then I would want to perform
a more traditional statistical analysis.
I'd want to build a parsimonious
interpreter model.
And I would want to figure out things
like what I mentioned earlier about
the issue with the pregnant women.
Now, that probably wouldn't be
terribly of interest to scientists or
medical practitioners any of them,
because it's just a kind of quirky little,
it's just a demographic fact really.
But you might wanna learn if there's
certain combinations of the claims that
might lead to a greater propensity for
hospital stays,
which might then lead to the ability
to treat people earlier.
So success, in this case,
would be anything that was learned about
hospital stays from insurance claims data.
Another very famous prediction
example was the Google flu trends.
This came out several years ago, and
it was a very,
it generated a lot of excitement.
And here, the very clever
people at Google came up with
the idea that well they could maybe detect
flu outbreaks before the Centers for
Disease Control by looking
at search terms and
geographic information associated
with the search terms.
So if lots of people were searching for
Tamiflu, or searching for
headaches and fevers, etc.
That might lead to a greater propensity,
or greater risk that a flu
outbreak in that particular area where
most of the searches were coming from.
So in this case, their goal was
to build an automated system for
predicting flu outbreaks.
And their success was anything that
produces reliable predictions as judged by
the more thorough information that came
out from the CDC, but much slower.
So their goal was to beat the CDC in
terms of time, but then they had the high
quality data coming in a little bit later
to actually validate their algorithm.
So contrast this with what flu
researchers, like I'm in the school public
health at Johns Hopkins,
that flu researchers here do all the time.
They want to better
understand flu outbreaks.
So they want to build models that
helps us understand specifically why
flu outbreaks occur in certain areas.
So for them,
search terms probably wouldn't be enough.
They need more of the kind of information
that the CDC, for example, was collecting,
which Includes actual prescription counts
for Tamiflu and that sort of thing.
So again, so all of these examples really
emphasize, in my mind, kind of this big
dividing line between what is typically
going on in a machine learning experiment
versus what's typically going on in
a traditional statistical experiment.
So I hope what I've emphasized
in this lecture is that
both approaches are extremely valuable,
and they have their place.
However, typically, the amount of model
complexity and assumptions, etc., differs
quite a bit between the two approaches,
because their goals are very different.
And I would just end this part of the
discussion with a little caveat that says,
well there's the machine
learning community I've noticed,
has started to build super population
models to evaluate their algorithms, and
so they're kind of connecting
it to traditional statistics.
In addition, there's been a lot of work
on making machine algorithm output in
addition to producing these
ultra high quality predictions,
making them much more interpretable.
I've also seen a lot of people taking
traditional statistical approaches and
building them up slightly in
terms of complexity to try and
produce better predictions.
So it's interesting that in a lot of ways
the two areas are meeting in the middle,
and these distinctions that I've
outlined a lot in this lecture,
that I am outlining a lot in this lecture,
are getting grayed quite a bit.